---
title: "Binomial"
date_created: 2023-11-10
topic: economics
tags: [history, ethnography]
---

# Binomial

BINOMIAL (from the Lat. _bi-, bis_, twice, and _nomen_, a name or term),
in mathematics, a word first introduced by Robert Recorde (1557) to
denote a quantity composed of the sum or difference to two terms; as a +
b, a - b. The terms trinomial, quadrinomial, multinomial, &c., are
applied to expressions composed similarly of three, four or many
quantities.

The _binomial theorem_ is a celebrated theorem, originally due to Sir
Isaac Newton, by which any power of a binomial can be expressed as a
series. In its modern form the theorem, which is true for all values of
n, is written as

                                 n·(n-1)
  (x + a)^n  = x^n + nax^(n-1) + ------- a²x^(n-2)
                                   1·2

                 n·(n-1)·(n-2)
               + -------------a³x^(n-3) ... + a^n.
                     1·2·3

The reader is referred to the article ALGEBRA for the proof and
applications of this theorem; here we shall only treat of the history of
its discovery.

The original form of the theorem was first given in a letter, dated the
13th of June 1676, from Sir Isaac Newton to Henry Oldenburg for
communication to Wilhelm G. Leibnitz, although Newton had discovered it
some years previously. Newton there states that

                             m       m - n      m - 2n
  (p + pq)^(m/n) = p^(m/n) + -- aq + ----- bq + ------ cq ... &c.,
                             n        2n          3n

where p + pq is the quantity whose (m/n)th power or root is required, p
the first term of that quantity, and q the quotient of the rest divided
by p, m/n the power, which may be a positive or negative integer or a
fraction, and a, b, c, &c., the several terms in order, e.g.

                   m          (m - n)
  a = p^(m/n), b = -- aq, c = ------- bq, and so on.
                   n            2n

In a second letter, dated the 24th of October 1676, to Oldenburg, Newton
gave the train of reasoning by which he devised the theorem.

  "In the beginning of my mathematical studies, when I was perusing the
  works of the celebrated Dr Wallis, and considering the series by the
  interpolation of which he exhibits the area of the circle and
  hyperbola (for instance, in this series of curves whose common base or
  axis is x, and the ordinates respectively (1 - xx)^(0/2), (1 - xx)^½,
  (1 - xx)^(2/2), (1 - xx)^(3/2), &c), I perceived that if the areas of
  the alternate curves, which are x, x - (1/3)x³, x - (2/3)x³ +
  (1/5)x^5, x - (3/3)x³ + (3/5)x^5 - (1/7)x^7, &c., could be
  interpolated, we should obtain the areas of the intermediate ones, the
  first of which (1 - xx)^{½} is the area of the circle. Now in order to
  [do] this, it appeared that in all the series the first term was x;
  that the second terms (0/3)x³, (1/3)x³, (2/3)x³, &c., were in
  arithmetical progression; and consequently that the first two terms of
  all the series to be interpolated would be

        (½)x³      (3/2)x³      (5/2)x³
    x - -----, x - -------, x - -------, &c.
          3           3            3

  "Now for the interpolation of the rest, I considered that the
  denominators 1, 3, 5, &c., were in arithmetical progression; and that
  therefore only the numerical coefficients of the numerators were to be
  investigated. But these in the alternate areas, which are given, were
  the same with the figures of which the several powers of 11 consist,
  viz., of 11°, 11¹, 11², 11³, that is, the first 1; the second, 1, 1;
  the third, 1, 2, 1,; the fourth 1, 3, 3, 1; and so on. I enquired
  therefore how, in these series, the rest of the terms may be derived
  from the first two being given; and I found that by putting m for the
  second figure or term, the rest should be produced by the continued
  multiplication of the terms of this series

    m - 0   m - 1   m - 2
    ----- × ----- × ----- ..., &c ...
      1       2       3

  This rule I therefore applied to the series to be interpolated. And
  since, in the series for the circle, the second term was (½x³)/3, I
  put m = ½.... And hence I found the required area of the circular
  segment to be

        ½x³   (1/8)x^5   (1/16)x^7
    x - --- - -------- - ---------, &c. ...
         3       5           7

  And in the same manner might be produced the interpolated areas of
  other curves; as also the area of the hyperbola and the other
  alternates in this series (1 + xx)^(0/2), (1 + xx)^½, (1 + xx)^(2/2),
  &c. ... Having proceeded so far, I considered that the terms (1 -
  xx)^(0/2), (1 - xx)^(2/2), (1 - xx)^(4/2), (1 - xx)^(6/2), &c., that
  is 1, 1 - x², 1 - 2x² + x^4, 1 - 3x² + 3x^4, - x^6, &c., might be
  interpolated in the same manner as the areas generated by them, and
  for this, nothing more was required than to omit the denominators 1,
  3, 5, 7, &c., in the terms expressing the areas; that is, the
  coefficients of the terms of the quantity to be interpolated (1 -
  xx)^½ or (1 - xx)^(3/2), or generally (1 - xx)^m will be produced by
  the continued multiplication of this series

        m - 1   m - 2   m - 3
    m × ----- × ----- × ----- ... &c.
          2       3       4

The binomial theorem was thus discovered as a development of John
Wallis's investigations in the method of _interpolation_. Newton gave no
proof, and it was in the _Ars Conjectandi_ (1713) that James Bernoulli's
proof for positive integral values of the exponent was first published,
although Bernoulli must have discovered it many years previously. A
rigorous demonstration was wanting for many years, Leonhard Euler's
proof for negative and fractional values being faulty, and was finally
given by Niels Heinrik Abel.

The _multi_- (or _poly_-) _nomial theorem_ has for its object the
expansion of any power of a multinomial and was discussed in 1697 by
Abraham Demoivre (see COMBINATORIAL ANALYSIS).

  REFERENCES.--For the history of the binomial theorem, see John
  Collins, _Commercium Epistolicum_ (1712); S.P. Rigaud, _The
  Correspondence of Scientific Men of the 17th Century_ (1841); M.
  Cantor, _Geschichte der Mathematik_ (1894-1901).

## See also

- [[Maine-Et-Loire]]
- [[Kalinjar]]
- [[Bacon]]
- [[Buenos Aires]]

## References

- <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclopædia_Britannica/Binomial>

#economics-theory #art-studies
