---
title: "Cycloid"
date_created: 2023-08-03
topic: geography-studies
---

# Cycloid

CYCLOID (from Gr. [Greek: kuklos], circle, and [Greek: eidos], form), in
geometry, the curve traced out by a point carried on a circle which
rolls along a straight line. The name cycloid is now restricted to the
curve described when the tracing-point is on the circumference of the
circle; if the point is either within or without the circle the curves
are generally termed _trochoids_, but they are also known as the
_prolate_ and _curtate_ cycloids respectively. The cycloid is the
simplest member of the class of curves known as roulettes.

No mention of the cycloid has been found in writings prior to the 15th
century. Francis Schooten (_Commentary on Descartes_) assigns the
invention of the curve to Rene Descartes and the first publication on
this subject after Descartes to Marin Mersenne. Evangelista Torricelli,
in the first regular dissertation on the cycloid (_De dimensione
cycloidis_, an appendix to his _De dimensione parabolae_, 1644), states
that his friend and tutor Galileo discovered the curve about 1599. John
Wallis discussed both the history and properties of the curve in a tract
_De cycloide_ published at Oxford in 1659. He there shows that the
cycloid was investigated by Carolus Bovillus about 1500, and by Cardinal
Cusanus (Nicolaus de Cusa) as early as 1451. Honore Fabri (_Synopsis
geometrica_, 1669) treated of the curve and enumerated many theorems
concerning it. Many other mathematicians have written on the
cycloid--Blaise Pascal, W. G. Leibnitz, the Bernoullis, Roger Cotes and
others--and so assiduously was it studied that it was sometimes named
the "Helen of Geometers." The determination of the area was the subject
of many investigations and much controversy. Galileo attempted the
evaluation by weighing the curve against the generating circle; this
rough method gave only an approximate value, viz., a little less than
thrice the generating circle. Torricelli, by employing the "method of
indivisibles," deduced that the area was exactly three times that of the
generating circle; this result had been previously established in 1640
in France by G. P. de Roberval, but his investigation was unknown in
Italy. Blaise Pascal determined the area of the section made by any line
parallel to the base and the volumes and centres of gravity of the
solids generated by revolving the curve about its axis and base. Before
publishing his results he proposed these problems for public competition
in 1658 under the assumed name of Amos Dettonville. John Wallis in
England, and A. la Louere in France, accepted the challenge, but the
former could only submit incorrect solutions, while the latter failed
completely. Having established his priority, Pascal published his
investigations, which occasioned a great sensation among his
contemporaries, and Wallis was enabled to correct his methods. Sir
Christopher Wren, the famous architect, determined the length of the arc
and its centre of gravity, and Pierre Fermat deduced the surface of the
spindle generated by its revolution. A famous period in the history of
the cycloid is marked by a bitter controversy which sprang up between
Descartes and Roberval. The evaluation of the area of the curve had made
Roberval famous in France, but Descartes considered that the value of
his investigation had been grossly exaggerated; he declared the problem
to be of an elementary nature and submitted a short and simple solution.
At the same time he challenged Roberval and Fermat to construct the
tangent; Roberval failed but Fermat succeeded. This problem was solved
independently by Vicenzo Viviani in Italy. The cartesian equation was
first given by Wilhelm Gottfried Leibnitz (_Acta eruditorum_, 1686) in
the form y = (2x - x^2)(1/2) + [int](2x - x^2)(1/2)dx. Among other early
writers on the cycloid were Phillippe de Lahire (1640-1718) and Francois
Nicole (1683-1758).

The mechanical properties of the cycloid were investigated by Christiaan
Huygens, who proved the curve to be tautochronous. His enquiries into
evolutes enabled him to prove that the evolute of a cycloid was an equal
cycloid, and by utilizing this property he constructed the isochronal
pendulum generally known as the _cycloidal pendulum_. In 1697 John
Bernoulli proposed the famous problem of the _brachistochrone_ (see
MECHANICS), and it was proved by Leibnitz, Newton and several others
that the cycloid was the required curve.

  The method by which the cycloid is generated shows that it consists of
  an infinite number of cusps placed along the fixed line and separated
  by a constant distance equal to the circumference of the rolling
  circle. The name cycloid is usually restricted to the portion between
  two consecutive cusps (fig. 1, curve a); the fixed line LM is termed
  the base, and the line PQ which divides the curve symmetrically is the
  _axis_. The co-ordinates of any point R on the cycloid are expressible
  in the form x = a([theta] + sin [theta]); y = a(1 - cos [theta]),
  where the co-ordinate axes are the tangent at the vertex O and the
  axis of the curve, a is the radius of the generating circle, and
  [theta] the angle R'CO, where RR' is parallel to LM and C is the
  centre of the circle in its symmetric position. Eliminating [theta]
  between these two relations the equation is obtained in the form x =
  (2ay - y^2)(1/2) + a vers-^1 y/a. The clumsiness of the relation
  renders it practically useless, and the two separate relations in
  terms of a single parameter [theta] suffice for the deduction of most
  of the properties of the curve. The length of any arc may be
  determined by geometrical considerations or by the methods of the
  integral calculus. When measured from the vertex the results may be
  expressed in the forms s = 4a sin 1/2[theta] and s = [root](8ay); the
  total length of the curve is 8a. The intrinsic equation is s = 4a sin
  [psi], and the equation to the evolute is s = 4a cos [psi], which
  proves the evolute to be a similar cycloid placed as in fig. 2, in
  which the curve QOP is the evolute and QPR the original cycloid. The
  radius of curvature at any point is readily deduced from the intrinsic
  equation and has the value [rho] = 4 cos 1/2[theta], and is equal to
  twice the normal which is 2a cos 1/2[theta].

  [Illustration: FIG. 1.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 2.]

  [Illustration: FIG. 3.]

  The _trochoids_ were studied by Torricelli and F. van Schooten, and
  more completely by John Wallis, who showed that they possessed
  properties similar to those of the common cycloid. The cartesian
  equation in terms similar to those used above is x = a[theta] + b sin
  [theta]; y = a - b cos [theta], where a is the radius of the
  generating circle and b the distance of the carried point from the
  centre of the circle. If the point is without the circle, i.e. if a <
  b, then the curve exhibits a succession of nodes or loops (fig. 1,
  curve b); if within the circle, i.e. if a > b, the curve has the form
  shown in fig. 1, curve c.

  The _companion to the cycloid_ is a curve so named on account of its
  similarity of construction, form and equation to the common cycloid.
  It is generated as follows: Let ABC be a circle having AB for a
  diameter. Draw any line DE perpendicular to AB and meeting the circle
  in E, and take a point P on DE such that the line DP = arc BE; then
  the locus of P is the companion to the cycloid. The curve is shown in
  fig. 3. The cartesian equation, referred to the fixed diameter and the
  tangent at B as axes may be expressed in the forms x = a[theta], y =
  a(1 - cos [theta]) and y - a = a sin (x/a - 1/2[pi]); the latter form
  shows that the locus is the harmonic curve.

  For epi- and hypo-cycloids and epi- and hypo-trochoids see EPICYCLOID.


  REFERENCES.--Geometrical constructions relating to the curves above
  described are to be found in T. H. Eagles, _Constructive Geometry of
  Plane Curves_. For the mechanical and analytical investigation,
  reference may be made to articles MECHANICS and INFINITESIMAL
  CALCULUS. A historical bibliography of these curves is given in
  Brocard, _Notes de bibliographie des courbes geometriques_ (1897). See
  also Moritz Cantor, _Geschichte der Mathematik_ (1894-1901).

## References

- <https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/1911_Encyclopædia_Britannica/Cycloid>

#religion #palaeontology
